The Project Gutenberg EBook of Alphabetical Vocabularies of the Clallum
and Lummi, by George Gibbs

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Alphabetical Vocabularies of the Clallum and Lummi

Author: George Gibbs

Release Date: August 3, 2007 [EBook #22228]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ALPHABETICAL VOCABULARIES ***




Produced by David Starner, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









 SHEA'S

 LIBRARY OF AMERICAN LINGUISTICS.

 XI.

 AMS PRESS, INC.
 NEW YORK




                  ALPHABETICAL VOCABULARIES

                            OF THE

                      CLALLAM AND LUMMI.

                              BY

                        GEORGE GIBBS.



 PUBLISHED UNDER THE AUSPICES OF THE SMITHSONIAN INSTITUTION.



                          NEW YORK:
                       CRAMOISY PRESS.
                            1863.




 Transcriber's Note: Obvious printer errors have been corrected. All
 other inconsistencies are as in the original. A table of contents,
 though not present in the original, has been provided below:


   Preface

   Vocabulary of the Clallam
   A, B, C, D, E, F, G, H, I, J, K, L, M, N, O, P, Q, R, S, T, U, W, Y.

   Local Nomenclature of the Clallam Tribe

   Vocabulary of the Lummi
   A, B, C, D, E, F, G, H, I, J, K, L, M, N, O, P, R, S, T, U, W, Y.

   Local Nomenclature of the Lummi Tribe

   Names of Lummi Chiefs




PREFACE.


The tribe of Clallams, as they are usually called by the residents of
Washington Territory--by the neighboring Indians named S'klal′am, and
denominated by themselves Nūs-klái yūm--inhabit the southern shore
of Fuca Strait, from about the Okĕho River on the west, to Port
Townshend on the east, bordering in the first direction on the Makahs,
sometimes called Classets (the Klaizzart of Jewitt), a tribe of the
Nootka family who inhabit Cape Flattery, and in the other on the
Chemakum, like themselves a branch of the Selish, though a yet more
remote one. Their language is the same, with some dialectic differences
only, as that of the Songhus and Sokes of Vancouver Island opposite. It
is this which has been referred to by Drs. Scouler and Latham as the
"Nusdalum," undoubtedly, in the first instance, a misprint.

The Clallam differs materially from the other Selish languages of the
Puget Sound country, though less from the Lummi than the rest. Its
noticeable feature is the frequent occurrence of the nasal _ng_.

The Lummi tribe live on the lower part of a river heading in the Cascade
Range, north-east of Mount Baker, and emptying by two mouths, one into
Bellingham Bay, the other into the Gulf of Georgia, the upper waters of
which are inhabited by the Nook-sahks (Nūk-sák). They are, however,
intruders here, their former country having been a part of the group of
islands between the continent and Vancouver Island, to which they still
occasionally resort. Their own name is Nūkh′lum-mi. The Skagits call
them Nūkh-lésh, and some of the other tribes Há-lum-mi. Their
dialectic affinities are rather with the Sannitch of the south-eastern
end of Vancouver Island than with any of the Indians of the main land,
and the two probably at one period formed a single tribe, which more
remotely was connected with the Clallams and Songhus. The Simiahmoo
(Si-mi-á-mu), a small remnant, living on the bay of that name, north of
them, belong likewise to this group. On the south the Lummi adjoin the
Samish and other bands of the Skagits, who in language approach the
Nisquallies.

Like the Clallam, their language abounds with the nasal _ng_, both as a
prefix and a termination. It has another peculiarity, in great measure
its own, in the broad sound of the letter _a_, somewhat as in the words
_mass_, _pass_, but even more prolonged. I have distinguished this in
the vocabulary by the italic. The letters _f_, _r_, _v_, _z_, are
wanting in both languages.

The Clallam and Lummi, as will be observed, contain three classes of
cardinals, which I have distinguished as _simple_, _personal_, and of
_valuation_, although these terms are not strictly accurate; certain
objects, besides men, being counted by the second, and others, as well
as money, by the third; I have never fully ascertained the distinctions
which govern their use. The words _animate_ and _inanimate_ do not
apply; those of _noble_ and _ignoble_, by which the French Missionaries
designated the names of objects in the Algonquin languages, probably
indicate the idea. Mr. Gallatin, in his "Notes on the Semi-Civilized
Nations of Mexico," &c.,[A] mentions the same